---
layout: post
title: gvim and heresy&#58; The use of a mouse with Vim 
date: 2015-12-23
author: Aaron Norby
categories: vim
---

Some programming activities are treated as bringing shame and maybe should bring a
bit of shame -- not being able to type without looking at the keyboard, for example. And
some programming activities that are treated as bringing shame are just fine.
They're not bad practice so much as heretical. 'Heretical' is a little bit of an
overblown term here I guess. 

Here's one. Vim is a *hardcore* text editor. Its keyboard shortcuts allows its
users to feel like they're using The Force. And the Church of Vim says that it is a
sin to use one's mouse. One does not need a mouse with Vim. The use of a mouse
shows only that the user does not have adequate acquaintance the power of the
Keyboard. Why the keyboard? Well, the Church of Vim is actually not really a church
but rather an order within the larger Church of Efficiency. And *never leaving the
home row* is the ultimate in efficiency, it is believed by this order of this
church. 

But I leave the home row. And I am a casual member of the Church of Vim, at least
in as much as I use it to do almost all of my text editing. I use it to write
code, of course, but prose as well. And when my Vim-enabled friends see me using
it, and then notice that I'm using guivim (MacVim, specifically), and then see that
I use my mouse pretty liberally -- I sometimes get a hard time about it. Wouldn't
it be faster, more vim-ish, to not use the mouse? To use Vim in the terminal only?
I do use Vim in the terminal sometimes -- mostly when I'm ssh'd into a remote
machine and need to edit files there. And then the mouse is unavailable. 

But, sometimes, the mouse is just faster. You need to just highlight a random piece
of text and the cursor isn't anywhere near it? The mouse is the answer. I use the
mouse when it will be faster, and I use keyboard shortcuts when keyboard shortcuts
will be faster. Maybe there is some set of keyboard shortcuts that I just don't
know that if I knew them I'd be even faster and never use the mouse. But looking up
and then memorizing shortcuts and learning them to the point of facility takes time
-- sometimes, it's a rabbit hole. Much of the time, the investment just isn't worth
it (or, anyway, very likely isn't worth it; I'm not going to study the issue and
take measurements -- wouldn't be worth it). 

The idea that using only the keyboard is somehow more efficient than using both the
keyboard and a mouse reminds me of a rumor I heard when I first starting using the
LaTeX typesetting system (which, if you haven't heard of it, is a markup language
for professional-quality typesetting, especially of mathematical notation). Being a
markup language, what people would say is that you can concentrate on your content
and not worry so much about where things go while you're writing (as you would when
writing in Word, say, where you pay attention to both at once). I've used LaTeX for
a while -- I even wrote an entire doctoral dissertation with it. And the reality is
that you will *never* spend so much time thinking about format and ignoring your
content as when using it. LaTeX, like Vim, is sometimes too powerful for its users'
own good. 

But despite all the evidence to the contrary people repeated this idea that it
would be more efficient. I think part of the reason is that LaTeX is just cool, and
so justification for switching to it from Word needed to be found. Part of the same
is the case with Vim. Vim is cool. Efficiency is some sort of justification. So the
universal efficiency of doing things the Vim way is adhered to. And don't get me
wrong: using Vim without ever using the mouse is way cooler than using the mouse.
It just isn't more efficient. And, despite the fact that I don't think efficiency
is all that great (that's a different post), on its basis I'm an advocate for
guivim. 

